*The Dispossessed*, by Ursula Leguin. 

Set between the two planets (or planet and moon) of Urras and Anarres. Urras is a planet on the edge of collapse under an unwieldy late-capitalism; Anarres is an anarcho-syndicalist state on a barren inhospitable moon. The story tells of a scientist from Anarres who has to travel back to the homeworld of Urras, and in the process ends up feeling isolated and disconnected from both worlds. Ecological economist Giorgos Kallis has used the economy of Anarres to illustrate what a degrowth-based society could look like (see). Phenomenologically, Anarres is an anarco-syndicalist world. There is no private property, no police, only a loose planning that consist in posting jobs that need to be done and free access to commons (kitchen, transport, housing, etc.). More details on Anarres’s economy can be found in this essay, also by Kallis. Mineral resources mostly stay in the ground, and humans on Anarres, though they live in a barren world with a much less rich ecosystem than Earth’s, are not headed for environmental collapse. The microeconomic theory supporting all this seems to rest on (a) hardwired social pressure to “do your part”, much as in human hunter-gatherers bands, and further encoded in the prevailing ideology (“Odonian”); (b) Anarresti practice sharing, which engenders abundance (“is not that the Anarresti are not poor because nobody goes hungry. They are not poor because nobody goes hungry while another eats”), which in turns engender self-limitation. The paper also invokes Le Guin’s work to argue that degrowth economies (or maybe any economic system?) can only be achieved through conflict. This is a theoretical asset, because it implies that there is little point in trying to achieve a perfectly incentive-compatible static model.

Related work in economics. There is an essay collection, The New Politics of Ursula K. Le Guin’s The Dispossessed. @jolwalton has contributed to papers mentioning this book here (focusing on Divlab and computation) and here (contrasting it to Edward Bellamy’s state-socialist utopia). Ecological economics Giorgos Kallis discusses The Dispossed in a chapter of the book In defence of degrowth (see).